# Python Variables

A **variable** is a portion of memory uses to store a value. A variable is referred to by its **variable name** which can be a short one character name, e.g., `x` or `y`, or a longer more descriptive name, e.g., `age` or `firstName`. 

Lets declare a variable. In the console enter the following and press the enter key.

```python
a = 2
```

You may be a bit disappointed to see that nothing happens. In fact Python has stored the value of 2 into the memory which can be accessed using the variable name `a`. We can retrieve the value of our variable by typing `a` into the console and press the enter key.

```python
a
```

So Python has retrieved the value of `a` for us. We can change the value of `a` simply by assigning another value. In the console enter the following and press the enter key.

```python
a = 3
```

and retrieve the value of `a` again

```python
a
```

Lets use variables to calculate the area of a rectangle. Enter the following into the console.

```python
width = 4
height = 3
area_of_rectangle = width * height
area_of_rectangle
```

Here we have created two variables `width` and `height` to store the width and height of a rectangle. We then create a third variable `areaOfRectangle` which stores the area of the rectangle calculated using the values stored in the other two variables. We then retrieve the area of the rectangle.

Python also allows us to declare multiple variables on a single line. Enter the following into the console.

```python
base, height = 2, 1
area_of_triangle = base * height / 2
area_of_triangle
```

Here we have declared two variables `base` and `height` and set their values to 2 and 1 respectively (this overwrites the previous value of `height`). Then we have calculated the area of a triangle and stored it in the variable `areaOfTriangle` and retrieved it.

## Variable names

Variable names must satisfy the following rules:

- a variable name must start with a letter or the underscore (`_`) character
- a variable name can only contain alpha-numeric characters and underscores (`a` - `z`, `A` - `Z` and `_`)
- a variable name is case sensitive, i.e., `age`, `Age` and `AGE` are three different variables
- a variable name cannot by any of the Python keywords

```{important}
Care must be taken when choosing variable names not to use a name already used by Python or a Python library. For example, if we use a variable name `print` then we will not by able to use the `print()` command (see below) since this will have been overwritten by our variable. 
```

An example of a variable name that would violate Python's naming rules is `base length`. Enter the following into the console

```python
base length = 2
```

When you press enter the following is printed to the console

```python
base length = 2
  Cell In[29], line 1
    base length = 2
         ^
SyntaxError: invalid syntax
```

Here Python is telling us that our variable name is invalid syntax. We can correct this using the variable name `base_length`, enter the following into the console

```python
base_length = 2
```

which Python has happily dealt with. It is good practice to use variable names that are descriptive of what the variable represents, e.g., using `length` for the length is easier to read and understand then `l` (try to avoid lowercase `l` are its easy to confuse then with the characters `1` and `I`). The use of underscores `_` in place of spaces in variable names is known as *pothole case* or *snake case* is common in Python as it makes code easier to read.

---

## Python Data Types

Variables can store different types of data which can do different things. 

```{list-table} Python Data Types
:header-rows: 1
:name: data-type-table

* - Data type 
  - Class
  - Description
* - Integer
  - `int`
  - Integer values, e.g., `-1`, `0`, `1`, `99`
* - Float
  - `float`
  - Floating point values (decimals), e.g., `1.5`, `2.718`, `3.1415927`
* - Complex
  - `complex`
  - Complex numbers, e.g., `1 + 2j` (note the use of `j` for the imaginary number)
* - Boolean
  - `bool`
  - Boolean values, e.g., `True` or `False`
* - String
  - `str`
  - Character string, e.g., `"hello"`
* - List
  - `list`
  - List of elements, e.g., `[1, 1.5, "hello", 1 + 2j]`
```

Python automatically use the appropriate data type for the value being assigned to a variable. The data type can be determined using the `type()` command. Enter the following into the console pressing the enter key after each one. 

```python
type(-1)
type(1.5)
type(1 + 2j)
type(True)
type("Hello")
type([1, 1.5, "hello", 1 + 2j])
```

### Casting data types

We can change the data type for a variable using **casting** with the following functions

- `int()` - returns an integer number from an input of a floating point number or string
- `float()` - returns a floating point number from an input of an integer or string
- `str()` - returns a string from a range of data types.

Lets try casting between different data types. Enter the following into the console pressing the enter key after each one.

```python
int(1.23)
int("123")
float(123)
float("123")
str(123)
str(1.23)
str(1 + 2j)
```

---

```{exercise}
:label: variables-exercise

The following formula converts a temperature from degree Fahrenheit to degrees Centigrade

$$ F = \frac{9}{5}C + 32.$$

Using appropriate variable names, use the console to convert the following temperatures from degrees Fahrenheit to degrees centigrade:

(a) $37.8^\circ C$

(b) $100^\circ C$

(c) $-40^\circ C$
```