# Python programs

We have used the console for a while now and you may start to notice that it has some shortcomings. For example, if you want to change the value of a variable, any other commands that use that variable will need to be entered again. This is where programs are useful. A program is a file or a collection of files that contain Python commands that can be run.

We are going to use Spyder to write our programs. In Spyder create a new file by clicking on **File > New file...** and this will create a new file called `untitled0.py` (Python programs have the file extension .py). Its always a good idea to name files with a meaningful file name so click on **File > Save as...**, navigate to the folder where you want to save the program (e.g., `Documents/Programming_skills`) and give it the filename `1_Python_basics.py`.

We are going to write a simple program that converts an angle expressed in degrees to radians. In your `1_Python_basics.py` file enter the following code (you can leave the text at the top of the file).

```python
pi = 3.1415927;
angle_in_degrees = 45;
angle_in_radians = angle_in_degrees * pi / 180;
```

The first three lines should be familiar to you as we have declared the two variables `pi` and `angle_in_degrees` which are used to calculate the value of `angle_in_radians`. Run the program by clicking on the play button or by pressing the F5 key. Not a lot happens apart from the text `runfile(...)` appearing in the console. We need to output the value of the angle in radians so add the following command to your program.

```python
print(angle_in_radians)
```

Running your program now outputs the following to the console window.

```python
0.785398175
```

---

## Printing output

We have used the `print()` function to print the value of a variable to the console. This can be used to print a variety of data types, for example the command

```python
print("Hello world")
``` 

will print the text string `hello world`. Lets print a short message that tells someone what our program does. Edit your program so that the following appears above the `pi` variable declaration

```python
print("Degrees to radians conversion")

print("-----------------------------")
```

Running your program you should see the following printed to the console.

```text
Degrees to radians conversion
-----------------------------
0.785398175
```

---

## Printing text and numbers

So now our program has two print commands, one that prints some text and another that prints a floating point number. Wouldn't it be nice if we could print text and numbers at the same time. Fortunately for us we can do by putting an `f` between the opening bracket and the double quotes `"` and a variable in curly brackets `{...}`, i.e.,

```python
print(f"some text {variable}")
```

Edit your program so that the following print commands replace the command used to print the angle in radians.

```python
print(f"angle in degrees = {angle_in_degrees}")
print(f"angle in radians = {angle_in_radians}")
```

Running your program you should see the following printed to the console.

```text
Degrees to radians conversion
angle in degrees = 45
angle in radians = 0.785398175
```

---

## Formatting output

In our program the angle in radians is printed using 9 decimal places. We probably don't need this level of accuracy so lets reduce the number of decimal places to 3 by editing the print commands so that they look like the following.

```python
print(f"angle in degrees = {angle_in_degrees:6.3f}")
print(f"angle in radians = {angle_in_radians:6.3f}")
```

Running your program you should see the following printed to the console.

```text
Degrees to radians conversion
-----------------------------
angle in degrees = 45.000
angle in radians =  0.785
```

Notice that the angles have now been printed using 3 decimal places. This is an example of formatted output where we can control how the values of the variables are printed. The code to the right of the colon, `6.3f`, tells Python to print a float value that uses a total of 6 character spaces (including the decimal point) with 3 significant figures following the decimal point.

```{list-table} Format specifiers
:header-rows: 1
:name: format-specifiers-table

* - Data type
  - Specifier
  - Python code
  - Output
* - integer
  - `d`
  - `print(f"{2:3d}")`
  - `##2` (two blank spaces followed by `2`)
* - float
  - `f`
  - `print(f"{1/3:10.3f}")`
  - `#####0.333`
* - Scientific notation
  - `e`
  - `print(f"{123456:10.2e}")`
  - `##1.23e+05` (equivalent to $1.23\times 10^{5}$)
* - String
  - `s`
  - `print(f"{'hello':10s} world")`
  - `hello###### world`
```

If the number to the left of the decimal point is zero, Python will use the smallest number of spaces required to print the number, e.g., `print(f"{1.23456:0.2f}")` will print `1.23`.

---

## The newline character

The newline character, `\n`, is used to instruct Python to print the rest of the string on new line. For example

```python
print("This text \nis printed\n\non multiple lines \n\n\nusing a single print command.")
```

will print

```
This text 
is printed

on multiple lines 


using a single print command.
```

Lets add an empty line between where the angles in degrees and radians are printed. Edit the command used to print the angle in radians so that it looks like the following. 

```python
print(f"\nangle in radians = {angle_in_radians:6.3f}")
```

Running your program you should see the following.

```text
Degrees to radians conversion
-----------------------------
angle in degrees = 45.000

angle in radians =  0.785
```

---

## Formatting code

It is good programming practice to format your code so that is can be easily read. Guidelines for formatting Python code can be found in the [PEP style guide for Python code](https://pep8.org/) and this section covers some of the basics.

### Comments

A comment in a program is text that is ignored by Python when the code is executed and are useful to helping people understand the program. Comments in Python can be entered in two ways. The first is to use the `#` symbol

```python
# this is a comment
```

Here any text on the same line to the right of `#` is ignored. These are useful for short comments. For longer comments that span multiple lines we can use `"""` to start and end a comment.

```python
"""this is a comment
that spans multiple
lines"""
```

Comments are useful for telling someone (and yourself) what a program and individual lines of a program does. Add some comments to your program as shown below.

```python
"""
1_Python_basics.py by Jon Shiach, May 2024

A simple example program that converts an angle from degrees 
to radians
"""

# Print the header
print("Degrees to radians conversion")
print("-----------------------------")

# Define the variables
pi = 3.1415927;
angle_in_degrees = 45;

# Calculate the angle in radians
angle_in_radians = angle_in_degrees * pi / 180;

# Print the angle in degrees and radians
print(f"angle in degrees = {angle_in_degrees:6.3f}")
print(f"\nangle in radians = {angle_in_radians:6.3f}")
```

### Spaces
In a Python program spaces are ignored, however it is common practice to use spaces either side of the arithmetic operators so that it is more readable. It is also advisable to separate blocks of code with a blank line.

For example the code

```python
1*2+3*4+5/6
```

is equivalent to the code

```python
1 * 2 + 3 * 4 + 5 / 6
```

````{exercise}
:label: print-exercise

Write a program in a new file called `seconds.py` that determines the number of years, weeks, days, minutes and seconds that are in a given number of seconds. Your program should print out the result as a single sentence that mixes text and numbers. For example, if the given number of seconds is 1 million, then your program should print

```text
There are 0 years, 1 weeks, 4 days, 13 hours, 46 minutes and 40 seconds in 1000000 seconds.
```

Use your program to print the number of years, weeks, days, hours and minutes in 1 billion seconds.
````
