# Declaring functions

Functions in MATLAB are declared using the `function` keyword.

```matlab
function function_name()

% commands

end
```

Where `function` is the name which is used be the program to refer to the function. A function name must begin with a character or underscore and not a number. Also care must be taken not to use the same name as a previously defined function (e.g., if you define a new function called `max` then you won't be able to use MATLAB's built-in `max` function).

```{important}
Functions in MATLAB must be declared at the end of the file and no non-function declaration commands can follow a function. Functions declaration may be contained in a file only containing function declarations where the filename must match the first function in the file. 
```

Create a new MATLAB file called **M5_Functions.m** and save it to your OneDrive folder. Lets define a function that prints `hello world` to the command window. Enter the following code into your file.

```matlab
% 12. Functions

clear % Clear all variables
clc   % Clear command window

% Declaring functions
hello()

% ------------------------------------------------------------------------
function hello()

fprintf("hello world \n")

end
```

Here we have declared a function called `hello` that has no input argument (there is nothing between the brackets). The function prints the `hello world` string. We have also made a call to this function. Run your program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
hello world 
```

---

## Local variables

Any variables defined within a function are known as **local variables** because they can only be accessed from commands within the function. It can be useful to think of a function as a black box in that any variables which are defined within a function cannot be used outside of the function unless they have been returned by the function.

To demonstrate local variables, declare a new function by entering the following code at the end of the file.

```matlab
function print_name()

name = "Ellie Williams";
fprintf("%s\n", name)

end
```

and make a call to this function by entering the following code before the function declarations.

```matlab
fprintf("\n")
print_name()
```

Run your program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
Ellie Williams
```

Here the variable `name` is declared inside the function and outputted to the command window using the `fprintf()` command. Lets try to access `name` outside of the function. To demonstrate this, enter the following code into your program.

```python
fprintf("%s\n", name)
```

If you try to run your program you will see the following error message printed to the command window.

```text
Unrecognized function or variable 'name'.

Error in M12_Functions (line 12)
fprintf("%s\n", name)
```

MATLAB does not know what `name` is because it was declared inside of a function and is therefore a local variable. Comment out or delete this line so that your program runs ok.

---

## Exercise

Create a new MATLAB file called **M12_Functions_exercises.m** and save it to your OneDrive folder. Use it to answer the following exercises.

````{exercise}
:label: matlab-declaring-functions-ex

Write a function called `loving_it()` that outputs the following message to the command window

```text
I'm writing MATLAB programs and I'm loving it.
```

````
