# Inheritance

Inheritance is a fundamental concept in object orientated programming that allows new classes to inherit attributes and methods from an existing class. The existing class from which the new classes inherit is called the **parent class** (also known as **base class** or **super class**) and the new classes are called **child class** (also known as **derived class** and **sub class**).

The Python syntax for declaring a child class that inherits from a parent class is

```python
class Parent_class:
    # Parent class attributes and methods

class Child_class(Parent_class):
    # Child class attributes and methods
```

Consider our `Member` class for members of the university which contains the attributes `name` and `ID`. Lets create a child class for students of the university. Enter the following code into your program.

```python
# 7.3 Inheritance
class Student(Member):
    pass


ellie = Student("Ellie Williams", 24123456)

print("\n7.3 Inheritance\n---------------")
ellie.print()
```

Here we have declared a new class called `Student` that inherits from the `Member` class. The `pass` keyword does nothing and is a placeholder for future code. We then recreate the `ellie` object this time as an object of our new `Student` class and print the object details. Run your program and you should see the following added to the console.

```text
7.3 Inheritance
---------------

University Member Details
-------------------------
Name     : Ellie Williams
ID       : 24123456
```

Note that the `print()` method from the parent class is inherited by the child class. We can confirm that the `ellie` object is a member of the `Student` class using the `type()` function. Enter the following code into your program.

```python
print(type(ellie))
```

Rerun your program and the following should be added to the console.

```text
<class '__main__.Student'>
```

Thus confirming that `ellie` is a member of the `Student` class.

## Child class attributes

To add an attribute to a child class we simple declare in inside the class. Lets add the attribute `position` and set it equal to `"student"`. Change your `Student` class so that it looks like the following.

```python
class Student(Member):
    position = "student"
```

To check that this attribute has been assigned to every object of the `Student` class enter the following code into your program.

```python
print(ellie.position)
```

Rerun your program and the following should be added to the console.

```text
student
```

## Child class methods

Methods for the child class are declared in the same way that we do for any other class. However, declaring a method in a child class with the same name as that of a method of the parent class will overwrite the parent class method. For example, the `print()` method in the `Member` class does not print the `position` attribute that we added to the `Student` class. To fix this enter the following code into your `Student` class.

```python
def print(self):
    print("\nUniversity Member Details\n-------------------------")
    print(f"Name     : {self.name}")
    print(f"ID       : {self.ID}")
    print(f"Position : {self.position}")
```

Rerun your program and you should see the console output has changed to the following.

```text
University Member Details
-------------------------
Name     : Ellie Williams
ID       : 24123456
Position : student
```

## The super() function

The `print()` method that we added to the `Student` class repeats most if its code from the same method from its parent class `Member`. Instead of repeating this code we can use the `super()` function to give access to methods and properties of the parent class. Edit your `print()` method so that it looks like the following.

```python
def print(self):
    super().print()
    print(f"Position : {self.position}")
```

Here we have used the `super()` function to access the `print()` function from the parent class `Method` and then added a line to print the `position` attribute from the child class `Student`. Rerun your program and you should see that the console output hasn't changed.

## Child class constructors

We will probably want to use a different constructor for a child class. For example, lets add a constructor to the `Student` class that allows us to specify the course that the student is on. Add the following constructor to your `Student` class

```python
def __init__(self, name, ID, course):
    super().__init__(name, ID)
    self.course = course
```

Here we have declared a constructor that takes in three inputs `name`, `ID` and `course` and have used the `super()` function to use the constructor from the parent class. We have also assigned the `course` attribute to the input. To use this updated class, change your `ellie` object declaration so that it looks like the following.

```python
ellie = Student("Ellie Williams", 24123456, "Mathematics")
```

Finally, add the following line of code to the `print()` method to print the `course` attribute.

```python
print(f"Course   : {self.course}")
```

Run your program and you should see the console output changed to the following.

```text
University Member Details
-------------------------
Name     : Ellie Williams
ID       : 24123456
Position : student
Course   : Mathematics
```

---

## Exercises

```{exercise}
:label: oop-exercise-5

Declare the following classes that inherits from the `Vehicle` class from {ref}`oop-exercise-1`: 

1. A `Car` class with a constructor that 
2. A `Bicycle` class that sets an attribute `number_of_wheels` to 2 and sets the `max_speed` attribute to 40

For each child class add a method called `print()` that prints the details of the object.
```

```{exercise}
:label: oop-exercise-6

Declare the following classes that inherit from the `Shape` class from {ref}`oop-exercise-2`:

1. A `Triangle` class that has three attributes `side_1`, `side_2` and `side_3` for the lengths of the sides of the triangle
2. A `Rectangle` class that has two attributes `width` and `height` for the lengths of the sides of the rectangle
3. A `Circle` class that has the attribute `radius` for the radius of the circle

For each of your child class declare appropriate constructors, two methods to calculate the area and circumference of the shape and another method to print out the details.
```
