# MATLAB Variables

A **variable** is a portion of memory uses to store a value. A variable is referred to by its **variable name** which can be a short one character name, e.g., `x` or `y`, or a longer more descriptive name, e.g., `student_ID` or `first_name`.

Lets **declare** a variable and **assign** a value to it. In the console enter the following and press the enter key.

```matlab
>> a = 2

a =

     2
```

Here MATLAB has stored the value of 2 into the memory which can be accessed using the variable name `a`.

## Suppressing output

Note that MATLAB always returns the value of a command by default. To suppress this use a semi-colon `;` at the end of the line. This is  useful for programs that include multiple commands. To demonstrate this enter the following code into the command window.

```matlab
>> a = 2;
>>
```

Here we have assigned the value to 2 to the variable `a` but because we've used a semi-colon MATLAB has not returned the value. To return the value enter the following into the command window.

```matlab
>> a

a =

     2
```

Lets use variables to calculate the area of a rectangle. Enter the following into the console.

```matlab
>> width = 4;
>> height = 3;
>> area_of_rectangle = width * height;
>> area_of_rectangle

area_of_rectangle =

    12
```

Here we have created two variables `width` and `height` to store the width and height of a rectangle. We then create a third variable `area_of_rectangle` which stores the area of the rectangle calculated using the values stored in the other two variables. We then retrieve the area of the rectangle.

## Variable names

The choice of variable name is up to us but it must satisfy the following rules:

- a variable name must start with a letter or the underscore (`_`) character
- a variable name can only contain alpha-numeric characters and underscores (`a` - `z`, `A` - `Z` and `_`)
- a variable name is case sensitive, i.e., `age`, `Age` and `AGE` are three different variables
- a variable name cannot by any of the MATLAB keywords

```{important}
Care must be taken when choosing variable names not to use a name already used by MATLAB. For example, if we use a variable name `max` then we will not by able to use the `max()` function since this will have been overwritten by our variable. 
```

It is good practice to use variable names that are descriptive of what the variable represents, e.g., using `length` for the length is easier to read and understand then `l` (try to avoid lowercase `l` are its easy to confuse then with the characters `1` and `I`). The use of underscores `_` in place of spaces in variable names is known as **pothole case** or **snake case** is common in MATLAB as it makes code easier to read.

---

## Exercise

```{exercise}
:label: matlab-basics-exercise-2

The following formula converts a temperature from degree Fahrenheit to degrees Centigrade

$$ F = \frac{9}{5}C + 32.$$

Using appropriate variable names, convert the following temperatures from degrees Fahrenheit to degrees centigrade:

1. 37.8$^\circ$C
2. 100$^\circ$C
3. $-$40$^\circ$C
```
