# Manipulating Arrays

There may be times when you want to be able to manipulate arrays by performing actions such as appending values to the end of an array, inserting values into the middle and array or deleting elements from an array altogether.

---

## Appending to an array

To append (put something on the end of) to an array we use the syntax

```text
[ array, object ]
```

where `object` is the thing we are appending to `array`. To demonstrate this lets append the array `[4, 5]` to the end of the array `a`. Add the following code to your program.

```matlab
% 9.4 Manipulating arrays
fprintf("\n9.4 Manipulating arrays\n-----------------------\n")
a
a = [a, [4, 5]]
```

Run the program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
9.4 Manipulating arrays
-----------------------

a =

     1     2     3


a =

     1     2     3     4     5
```

When dealing with 2D arrays we can append to the right or underneath our array. To append to the right we use

```text
array = [array, object]
```

and to append underneath we use

```text
array = [array ; object]
````

To demonstrate this, enter the following code into your program.

```matlab
C = [A, B]

D = [A ; B]
```

Run your program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
C =

     1     2     5     6
     3     4     7     8


D =

     1     2
     3     4
     5     6
     7     8
```

Here `C` is formed by appending `B` onto the bottom of `A` and `D` is formed by appending `B` to the right of `A`.

---

## Inserting into an array

To insert an object into an array we can use

```text
array = [ array(1:index - 1), object, array(index:end) ]
```

where `object` will be inserted into `array` starting at the `index`. Lets insert the array `[6, 7, 8]` starting at the 3rd element of `a`. Add the following code to your program.

```matlab
a = [a(1 : 2), [6, 7, 8], a(3:end)]
```

Run the program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
a =

     1     2     6     7     8     3     4     5
```

We can do similar with 2D arrays. To demonstrate this lets insert the rows of `B` into `A` starting at the second row. Enter the following code into your program.

```matlab
E = [A(1,:) ; B ; A(2,:) ]
```

Run the program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
E =

     1     2
     5     6
     7     8
     3     4
```

Lets insert the columns of `B` into `A` starting at the second column. Enter the following code into your program.

```matlab
F = [A(:,1), B, A(:,2) ]
```

Run the program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
F =

     1     5     6     2
     3     7     8     4
```

---

## Sorting an array

To sort an array into ascending order we can use the `sort()` function. The syntax for this is

```text
sort(array)
```

Lets sort the array `a` into ascending order. To demonstrate this, enter the following code into your program.

```matlab
a = sort(a)
```

Run the program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
a =

     1     2     3     4     5     6     7     8
```

Lets sort the array `a` into descending order, enter the following code into your program.

```matlab
a = sort(a, 'descend')
```

Run the program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
a =

     8     7     6     5     4     3     2     1
```

---

## Reshaping an array

To reshape an array (change the shape to a different number of rows and columns) we can use the `reshape()` function. The syntax for this is

```text
reshape(array, rows, columns)
```

Lets reshape `a` so that it is a 3 $\times$ 2 array, enter the following code into your program.

```matlab
a = (1:6)
G = reshape(a, 3, 2)
```

Run the program and you should see the following added to the command window.

```text
a =

     1     2     3     4     5     6


G =

     1     4
     2     5
     3     6
```

Here `G` is formed by reshping the 1D array `a` into a 3 $\times$ 2 array where the elements are reshaped column-by-column (i.e., the first three elements `[1, 2, 3]` of `a` form the first column of `G`, the next three `[4, 5, 6]` form the second row of `G`). This is an example of **column-major** order which is used by programming languages such as Fortran upon which MATLAB is based.

---

## Exercise

```{exercise}
:label: matlab-arrays-exercise-4

Use the arrays from {ref}`matlab-arrays-exercise-1` and appropriate functions to print the following:

1. $D$ appended to the right of $B$
2. The first two rows of $D$ appended to the bottom of $B$
3. $D$ inserted between the 2nd and 3rd columns of $B$
4. $B$ with the middle row removed
5. $\vec{a}$ sorted in descending order
6. $C$ reshaped into an $8 \times 1$ array
```
