(python-programs-section)=

# Python programs

We have used the console for a while now and you may start to notice that it has some shortcomings. For example, if you want to change the value of a variable, any other commands that use that variable will need to be entered again. This is where programs are useful. A program is a file or a collection of files that contain Python commands that can be run.

We are going to use Spyder to write our programs. In Spyder create a new file:

1. Click on **File > New file...**. This will create a new file with the file name untitled0.py (Python programs have the file extension .py).
2. Click on **File > Save as...**, navigate to the folder where you want to save the program (e.g., **Documents/Programming_skills/**) and give it the filename **1_Python_basics.py**.

We are going to write a simple program that converts an angle expressed in degrees to radians. In your `1_Python_basics.py` file enter the following code (you can leave the text at the top of the file).

```python
pi = 3.1415927;
angle_in_degrees = 45;
angle_in_radians = angle_in_degrees * pi / 180;
```

The first three lines should be familiar to you as we have declared the two variables `pi` and `angle_in_degrees` which are used to calculate the value of `angle_in_radians`. Run the program by clicking on the play button or by pressing the F5 key. Not a lot happens apart from the text `runfile(...)` appearing in the console. We need to output the value of the angle in radians so add the following command to your program.

```python
print(angle_in_radians)
```

Running your program now outputs the following to the console.

```python
0.785398175
```

---

## Exercise

Create a new Python file called `1_Python_basics_exercises.py` and save it to your OneDrive folder. Use it to answer the remaining exercises in this chapter.

````{exercise}
:label: python-basics-exercise-4

Write a program similar to {ref}`python-basics-exercise-2` except that it converts a temperature from degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Centigrade and outputs the result to the console. 

Use your program to convert the following to degrees Centigrade:

1. 100 $^\circ$F
2. 0 $^\circ$F
````
