# The NumPy library

Python is designed to be a simple all purpose programming language to serve the needs of a wide variety of users. This is great as it means its easy to learn and use, however it also means that it does not have functions to perform the mathematical operations that we will be needing. Fortunately, we can import **libraries** which are a collection of objects (constants, commands and functions) into our programs so that we can use these to perform certain tasks.

One of the most useful Python libraries is <a href="https://numpy.org/doc/stable/index.html" target="_blank">NumPy</a> library (pronounced *Num-Pie*) which contains a range of functions useful for scientific computing and working with arrays. To import the NumPy library we use the `import` keyword. Run the following common in the console.

```python
import numpy
```

The `import` command tells Python to import the `numpy` library. We can then use an object from the NumPy library by appending `numpy.` to the name of the object. To demonstrate this run the following command in the console.

```python
numpy.sqrt(4)
```

Here we have used the `sqrt()` function from the NumPy library to calculate the square root of 4. Since we will be using lots of NumPy functions we can define a shorthand for the name of the library. To show this run the following command in the console.

```python
import numpy as np
```

Here we have defined the shorthand name `np` which was can use instead of `numpy` when using an object. To show this run the following command in the console.

```python
np.exp(1)
```

Here we have used the `exp()` function to calculate the value of $\exp(1)$. If you will only be using a few objects from a library you can import only the ones you will be using. To show this run the following commands in the console.

```python
from numpy import cos

cos(0)
```

Here we import the `cos()` function from NumPy and then used it to calculate the value of $\cos(0)$. Note that we did not need to append the name of the library to the function name.

````{Note} 
It is possible to import all objects from a library using the following syntax.

```python
from numpy import *
```

This is generally discouraged as it can cause naming collisions (e.g., if you had a variable name declared which is the same as an object of a library) and can be inefficient especially if the library contains a large number of objects.
````