# For loops

If we want to repeat the execution of a set of commands a given number of times then we can use a **for loop**. The Python syntax for a for loop is

```text
for variable in list:
    commands to be executed 
```

The `for` declaration requires a `loop variable` and a `list` followed by a colon `:`. The `loop variable` takes on the value of the first element in `list` and the commands in the indented lines below the for loop declaration are executed for this value. Then the `loop variable` takes on the value of the second element in `list` and the commands in the intended lines below are repeated for this value. The loop continues in this way for all of the elements in `list`.

Create a Python file called **4_Loops.py** and save it to your OneDrive folder. Enter the following code into your program.

```python
# =============================================================================
# 4. Loops
# =============================================================================

print("\n4. Loops\n--------")

# For loops
print("\n4.1 For loops\n-------------")
subjects = ["linear algebra", "programming skills", "calculus"]

for subject in subjects:
    print(subject)
```

Run your program and your should see the following printed to the console.

```text
4. Loops
--------

4.1 For loops
-------------
linear algebra
programming skills
calculus
```

Here we created a list containing three subjects and then used a for loop to print each of the subjects. A very useful Python function is `range()` that generates a list of numbers based on the `start`, `stop` and `step` values (similar to the [`np.arange()`](np.arange-section) function). Enter the following code into your program.

```python
print()

for i in range(5):
    print(i)
```

Run your program and you should see the following added to the console.

```text
0
1
2
3
4
```

## A dummy loop variable

Sometimes we want to repeat a set of commands a set number of times but the commands do not need the value of a loop variable. In these cases we can use an underscore `_` for a loop variable. 

For example, lets use a for loop to calculate the value of a base number raised to a power. Add the following code into your program

```python
# 4.1.1. Dummy loop variable
base = 2;
power = 10;
base_power = 1;

for _ in range(power):
    base_power *= base
  
print("\n4.1.1. Dummy loop variable\n--------------------------")  
print(f"{base}^{power} = {base_power}")
```

Here we have calculated $2^{10}$ using a for loop. Since we only need to multiply `base` by itself `power` times we don't need a for loop variable.

Run your program and you should see the following added to the console.

```text
4.1.1. Dummy loop variable
--------------------------
2^10 = 1024
```

(Of course in this case its much easier to use `2 ** 10`)

(fibonacci-sequence-section)=
## The Fibonacci sequence

To demonstrate how useful for loops are we will use one to generate the first $n$ numbers of the <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_sequence" target="_blank">Fibonacci sequence</a> $F_0, F_1, \ldots, F_n$ which is defined as

$$ F_n &= \begin{cases} 0, & n = 0, \\ 1, & n = 1, \\ F_{n-1} + F_{n-2}, & n \geq 2. \end{cases}$$

Lets write a program to create an array containing the first 20 Fibonacci numbers. Enter the following code into your program.

```python
# 4.1.2 Fibonacci sequence
import numpy as np

F = np.array([0, 1])

for n in range(2, 20):
    F = np.append(F, F[n-1] + F[n-2])

print("\n4.1.2 Fibonacci sequence\n------------------------")
print(f"F = {F}")
```

Here we initialise the array `F` so that it contains the first two values in the sequence and then use a for loop to loop through values of `n = 2, 3, ..., 20`. Inside the for loop we calculate the value of the $n$th number in the sequence and append it to the end of `F`.

Run your program and your should see the following added to the console output.

```text
4.1.2 Fibonacci sequence
------------------------
F = [   0    1    1    2    3    5    8   13   21   34   55   89  144  233
  377  610  987 1597 2584 4181]
```

---

## Exercises

Create a new Python file called **4_Loops_exercises.py** and save it to your OneDrive folder. Use it to answer the following exercises.

```{exercise}
:label: loops-exercise-1

Use a for loop to print "hello world" 10 times.
```

```{exercise}
:label: loops-exercise-2

The factorial of a number $n$ is denoted by $n!$ and defined as the product of the numbers 1 to $n$

$$ n! = 1 \times 2 \times 3 \times \cdotss \times (n - 1) \times n. $$

Use a for loop to calculate 52!, the number of ways a regular pack of cards can be shuffled.[^1] 
```

[^1]: To give you an idea of how large the number 52! is imagine you are standing on the equator and set a timer to countdown from 52! seconds. After 1 billion years has elapsed take a step forward. Wait another billion years before taking a seconds step. Do this until you've reached all the way around the Earth and now take one drop of water out of the Pacific ocean and set it aside. Repeat this whole process until the entire Pacific ocean is drained and then lay a piece of paper on the ground. Repeat this entire process of draining the ocean again to lay another piece of paper on top of the first one. Rinse and repeat until that stack of papers reaches the sun. Complete all of this 1000 more times and you'll still only be a third of the way through the timer!

```{exercise}
:label: loops-exercise-3

The series expansion of $\sin(x)$ is

$$\sin(x) = \sum_{n = 0}^\infty \frac{(-1)^n}{(2 n + 1)!} x^{2n+1}. $$

Use a for loop to compute $\sin(\frac{\pi}{4}) \approx 0.707$ by summing this series up to the first 5 terms. 

Hints: the following commands from the `math` library may come in useful:

- `math.pi` returns the value of $\pi$
- `math.factorial(n)` returns $n!$
```