# Classes

A class in Python is declared using the `class` keyword.

```python
class Class_name:
    attributes
```

Where `Class_name` is the name of the class and `attributes` is a list of the class attributes. Once a class has been declared an object of the class is creates using

```python
object_name = Class_name
```

The attributes of an object are accessed using

```python
object_name.attribute
```

Lets create a class for members of the university. Create a new Python file called **7_Object_orientated_programming.py** and save it to your OneDrive folder. Enter the following code into your program.

```python
# =============================================================================
# 7. Classes
# =============================================================================

# 7.1 Classes
class Member:
    name = "Joel Miller"
    ID = 12345678
    position = "Lecturer"
    

joel = Member

print("\n7.1 Classes\n-----------")
print(joel.name)
print(joel.ID)
print(joel.position)
```

Here we have declared a class called `Member` which has three attributes `name`, `ID` and `position` which we set to two strings and an integer. We then create an object called `joel` and print the values of the attributes. Run your program and the you should see the following added to the console.

```text
7.1 Classes
-----------
Joel Miller
12345678
Lecturer
```

## Changing the attributes

Lets create another object of our `Member` class and print out the attributes. Enter the following code into your program.

```python
# 7.1.1 Changing the attributes
ellie = Member

print("\n7.1.1 Changing the attributes\n-----------------------------")
print(ellie.name)
print(ellie.ID)
print(ellie.position)
```

Run your program and you should see the following added to the console.

```text
7.1.1 Changing the attributes
-----------------------------
Joel Miller
12345678
Lecturer
```

To change the values of the attributes we simply access the attributes of the object and set their values. Enter the following code into your program.

```python
ellie.name = "Ellie Williams"
ellie.ID = "24123456"
ellie.position = "Student"

print()
print(ellie.name)
print(ellie.ID)
print(ellie.position
```

Run your program and you should see the following added to the console.

```text
Ellie Williams
24123456
Student
```

---

## Constructors

Changing the attributes whenever we want to create a new object is a bit cumbersome. Fortunately in python we have the `__init__()` method (a method is a function that belongs to a class) that is called whenever a new object is created. This is known as a **constructor** is an useful for setting the values of attributes and performing any initialisation routines. The Python syntax for a constructor is

```python
def __init__(self, arguments):
    commands
```

Where `self` is parameter that is the reference to the current instance of the class. Lets declare a constructor to assign the attributes to inputted values and output a message to the console. In your `Member` class, enter the following code.

```python
def __init__(self, name, ID, position):
    self.name = name
    self.ID = ID
    self.position = position
```   

Here we have added a constructor that takes inputs of `name`, `ID` and `positions` and assigns them to the appropriate attributes. At the end of your program enter the following code.

```python
# Constructors
tommy = Member("Tommy Miller", 87654321, "Lecturer")

print("\nConstructor\n-----------")
print(tommy.name)
print(tommy.ID)
print(tommy.position)
```

We then create a new object `tommy` with its attributes. Run your program and you should see the following added to the console.

```text
7.1.2 Constructors
------------------
Tommy Miller
87654321
Lecturer
```
