(matlab-programs-section)=

# MATLAB programs

We have used the console for a while now and you may start to notice that it has some shortcomings. For example, if you want to change the value of a variable, any other commands that use that variable will need to be entered again. This is where programs are useful. A program is a file or a collection of files that contain Python commands that can be run.

In MATLAB create a new file:

1. Click on **New Script** icon in the top left hand corner of the MATLAB window. This will open up an **Editor window** with the title **untitled**.
2. Click on the **Save** icon, navigate to the folder where you want to save the program (e.g., **Documents/Programming_skills/**) and give it the filename **M1_MATLAB_basics.py** (MATLAB script filenames must start with a letter).

We are going to write a simple program that converts an angle expressed in degrees to radians. In your **M1_Python_basics.py** file enter the following code (you can leave the text at the top of the file).

```matlab
angle_in_degrees = 45;
angle_in_radians = angle_in_degrees * pi / 180;
angle_in_radians
```

The first three lines should be familiar to you as we have declared the variable `angle_in_degrees` which is used to calculate the value of `angle_in_radians`. Note that the value of `pi` is already built into MATLAB. Run the program by clicking on the run button or by pressing the F5 key, you should see the following output added to the command window.

```text
>> M1_MATLAB_basics

angle_in_radians =

    0.7854
```

---

## Exercise

Create a new MATLAB file called `M1_MATLAB_basics_exercises.py` and save it to your OneDrive folder. Use it to answer the remaining exercises in this chapter.

````{exercise}
:label: matlab-basics-exercise-4

Write a program similar to {ref}`matlab-basics-exercise-2` except that it converts a temperature from degrees Fahrenheit to degrees Centigrade and outputs the result to the console. 

Use your program to convert the following to degrees Centigrade:

1. 100 $^\circ$F
2. 0 $^\circ$F
````
